# tech-for-wildlife-conservation
An Enhanced Real-time Wildlife Poacher Detection Solution using Cost-Efficient Thermal Infrared Imaging with UAVs and Spatio-temporal Video Data 

Wildlife poaching of endangered species like elephants and rhinoceroses in Africa and Asia is a leading cause of the planet’s accelerating biodiversity crisis and resultant ecosystem collapse. The demand for ivory has decimated the elephant population. The main issue associated with attempts to tackle this crisis is the vast area of the wildlife national parks. Recently, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) equipped with heat-sensing infrared cameras have been deployed to help park rangers survey large areas of national parks at night when >$80% of poaching occurs. In order to maximize surveillance area (with fixed flight time and battery constraints) while avoiding detection, UAVs need to fly at high altitudes (>$400ft). This results in very few pixels associated with the objects of interest in these thermal infrared videos. Current state-of-art methods utilize shape-based object detection techniques to identify animals/humans in these thermal images, with detection accuracy of only 20%. In order to battle this inaccuracy, I developed a novel method that exploits video data’s spatio-temporal nature (differences in movement pattern of animals/humans over time, i.e. turning radius, speed) to derive unique time series. I then use dynamic time warping metrics and K-Nearest Neighbor Clustering to classify these series as human or animal. When tested our method on a real-life thermal infrared videos dataset (BIRDSAI), collected in partnership with four African national parks, our method was able to detect poachers with 97\% sensitivity. Furthermore, our method replaces the need for $4,800 high-resolution nighttime-thermal cameras with commodity thermal cameras (<$250), implemented in our design prototype.
